Batch PR (#1)
mvadari/xrpl-docs: Atomic.md

Potential use cases:
* Sending an `NFTokenMint` and `NFTokenCreateOffer` transaction in the same fell swoop (if the offer creation fails, so does the mint)
* Sending a few different offers that might fail and only wanting one to succeed
* Fees for platforms packaged with the actual transaction
* Atomic swaps (if multiple accounts are involved)

## 1. Overview

This spec proposes one new transaction: `Atomic`. It will not require any new ledger objects, nor modifications to existing ledger objects. It will require an amendment, tentatively titled `featureAtomic`.

### 1.1. Terminology
* **Inner transaction**: the sub-transactions included in the `Atomic` transaction, which are the same as the existing set of transactions.
* **Outer transaction**: the wrapper `Atomic` transaction itself.

## 2. Transaction: `Atomic`

|FieldName | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
|:---------|:-----------|:---------------|:------------|
|`TransactionType`|✔️|`string`|`UInt16`|
|`Account`|✔️|`string`|`STAccount`|
|`Fee`|✔️|`string`|`STAmount`|
|`AtomicityType`|✔️|`number`|`UInt8`|
|`RawTransactions`|!|`array`|`STArray`|

> |`Transactions`|✔️|`array`|`Vector256`|

Reviewer: Should this instead be called `TxnIDs`, to parallel the naming convention that seems to be implied by [AccountTxnID](https://xrpl.org/docs/references/protocol/transactions/common-fields/#accounttxnid).

Depending on your opinion of that, maybe we then call `RawTransactions` just `Transactions`?

Author: Good call. I still like `RawTransactions`, but I'm open to changing it.

Reviewer: I like `RawTransactions` actually -- or at least something more than just `Transactions` -- as a signal that they won't be stored inside of the Batch Tx the final ledger data.

|`BatchSigners`| |`array`|`STArray`|

```
{
    TransactionType: "Atomic",
    Account: "r.....",
    AtomicityType: n,
    Transactions: [transaction hashes...]
    RawTransactions: [transaction blobs...], // not included in the signature or stored on ledger
    BatchSigners: [ // only sign the list of transaction hashes and probably the atomicity type
      BatchSigner: {
        Account: "r.....",
        Signature: "...."
      },
      BatchSigner: {
        Account: "r.....",
        Signers: [...] // multisign
      },
      ...
    ],
    SigningPubKey: "....",
    TxnSignature: "...."
}
```

### 2.1. `Fee`

> $$(n+2)*base\_fee$$

Reviewer: I kind of like the simplicity of David S's fee design. WDYT?

> ...only the outer transaction pays a fee. The fee is equal to the sum of the fees required for all inner transactions plus the cost of the outer transaction itself. The fee is claimed by the outer transaction's execution and no inner transactions claim fees.

Transactions fees should be De minimis in general (so outer account pays all tx fees shouldn't be too much of a burden), but the bigger advantage I see in just having one entity pay the fees is that it allows only a single entity to try and determine what fees might need to be to  make the transaction succeed, and this can then be done only once -- at the time of submission, which is arguably the best time to decide how much will need to be paid.

Author: It just seems a bit complicated to implement that.

Author: Actually, after some further digging, I think as long as we don't check `calculateBaseFee` in the inner transaction processing we should be good.

Author: I don't remember if we discussed this directly, but I like this change because then fee escalation applies on the total fee, not on just the batch processing fee.

<pre>

> Title:       <b>Atomic/Batch Transactions</b>

Reviewer: What do you think about just calling this `Batch`? IMHO, `Atomic` implies that all transactions will always work together (or not) but Batch leaves room for that not always holding.

Author: I actually perceived the connotation as reversed. The transactions are always executing atomically, but they're not always all executing.

Reviewer: Oh interesting -- I was thinking more along the lines of `ACID` transactions (like, in a database) where it's something like "all of the commands that make up a transaction are treated as a single unit and either `all succeed` or `all fail` together."

Author: Honestly, the community has mostly been calling it `Batch`, so I'm not opposed to changing it. I've just gotten a bit attached to `Atomic` 🙂 . We'd probably also want to rename `AtomicityType` to `BatchType` then, or move that to flags.

Author: I tried looking up what other chains call it and:
> On Algorand, atomic transfers are implemented as irreducible batch operations

🤦 
https://developer.algorand.org/docs/get-details/atomic_transfers/

Author: Renamed 🙂

* **Outer transaction**: the wrapper `Atomic` transaction itself.
* **Atomicity type**: the "mode" of atomic processing that the transaction uses. See section 2.2 for more details.

## 2. Transaction: `Atomic`

|FieldName | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
|:---------|:-----------|:---------------|:------------|
|`TransactionType`|✔️|`string`|`UInt16`|
|`Account`|✔️|`string`|`STAccount`|
|`Fee`|✔️|`string`|`STAmount`|
|`Flags`|✔️|`number`|`UInt32`|
|`RawTransactions`|!|`array`|`STArray`|
|`TxnIDs`|✔️|`array`|`Vector256`|
|`AtomicSigners`| |`array`|`STArray`|

<!--
```typescript
{
    TransactionType: "Atomic",
    Account: "r.....",
    Flags: "1",
    TxnIDs: [transaction hashes...]
    RawTransactions: [transaction blobs...], // not included in the signature or stored on ledger
    AtomicSigners: [ // only sign the list of transaction hashes and probably the atomicity type
      AtomicSigner: {
        Account: "r.....",
        Signature: "...."
      },
      AtomicSigner: {
        Account: "r.....",
        Signers: [...] // multisign
      },
      ...
    ],
    SigningPubKey: "....",
    TxnSignature: "...."
}
```
-->

### 2.1. `Fee`

> $$(n+2)*base\textunderscore fee$$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fee for the outer transaction alone is:
$$(n+2)*base\textunderscore fee$$
```

 
### 2.2. `Flags`

The `Flags` field represents the **atomicity type** of the transaction. Exactly one must be specified in an `Atomic` transaction.

This spec supports four types of atomicity (each will have an integer value, and tooling can handle the translation between integer values and the string they represent): 
* `ALL` or `tfAll` (with a value of `0x00000001`)
* `ONLYONE` or `tfOnlyOne` (with a value of `0x00000002`)
* `BATCH` or `tfBatch` (with a value of `0x00000004`)
* `INDEPENDENT` or `tfIndependent` (with a value of `0x00000008`)

#### 2.2.1. `ALL`
All or nothing. All transactions must succeed for any of them to succeed.

#### 2.2.2. `ONLYONE`
The first transaction to succeed will be the only one to succeed; all other transactions either failed or were never tried.

While this can sort of be done by submitting multiple transactions with the same sequence number, there is no guarantee that the transactions are processed in the same order they are sent.

#### 2.2.3. `BATCH`

> All transactions will be applied until the first failure, and all transactions after the first failure will not be applied.

Reviewer 2: I may have asked this before, but `BATCH` doesn't seem as descriptive as the other names. A more descriptive name might be more useful.
* `FIRSTFAILURE`
* `UNTILFAILURE`
* `STOPONFAIL`
* `ASMANYASPOSSIBLE`

Author: I like `UNTILFAILURE`. Thanks.

#### 2.2.4. `INDEPENDENT`
All transactions will be applied, regardless of failure.

While this can be achieved with tickets right now, adding it as an atomicity type allows a user to have this functionality without needing the extra reserve.

### 2.3. `RawTransactions`

`RawTransactions` contains the list of transactions that will be applied. There can be up to 8 transactions included. These transactions can come from one account or multiple accounts.

Each inner transaction:
* **Must** contain an `AtomicTxn` field (see section 3 for details).
* **Must not** have a sequence number. It must use a sequence number value of `0`.

> * **Must not** have a fee. It must use a fee value of `"0"`.

Reviewer 2: This contradicts [above](#21-fee), which says
> each inner transaction handles its own fees.

Author: Fixed section 2.1 - it was outdated

* **Must not** be signed (the global transaction is already signed by all relevant parties). They must instead have an empty string (`""`) in the `SigningPubKey` and `TxnSignature` fields.

> * **Must** include an `AtomicTxn` section (described in section 3)

Reviewer 2: This a repeat of the first bullet point.

A transaction will be considered a failure if it receives any result that is not `tesSUCCESS`.

> **This field is not included in the validated transaction**, since all transactions are included separately as a part of the ledger.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**This field is not included in the validated transaction, nor is it used to compute the outer transaction signature(s)**, since all transactions are included separately as a part of the ledger.
```

While this field seems complicated/confusing to work with, it can easily be abstracted away (e.g. as a part of autofilling) in tooling, and it's easy for `rippled` to check a hash doesn't match its corresponding transaction in `RawTransaction`.

### 2.5. `AtomicSigners`

This field operates similarly to [multisign](https://xrpl.org/docs/concepts/accounts/multi-signing/) on the XRPL. It is only needed if multiple accounts' transactions are included in the `Atomic` transaction; otherwise, the normal transaction signature provides the same security guarantees.

|FieldName | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
|:---------|:-----------|:---------------|:------------|
|`Account`|✔️|`string`|`STAccount`|
|`SigningPubKey`| |`string`|`STBlob`|
|`Signature`| |`string`|`STBlob`|
|`Signers`| |`array`|`STArray`|

#### 2.5.1. `Account`

> This is an account that has at least one inner transaction.

Reviewer 2: If there are multiple account transactions on the inner list, does the `Account` from the outer account sign in this array, or on the outer account? It needs to be one or the other, or the transaction may become fungible.

I propose that the outer `Account` use the "normal" signing fields on the outer transaction, and this `AtomicSigners` array only be used for holding signatures for "other" accounts' signature(s).

Author: I'm thinking about this as having two types of signatures, the _transaction_ signature and the _atomic_ signature. Both are `SigningPubKey`/`TxnSignature` in single account atomics. In multi-account atomics, the transaction signature is the standard `SigningPubKey`/`TxnSignature`, and `AtomicSigners` is the atomic signature. So if the outer `Account` is one of the inner accounts, then it would need two signatures.

Reviewer 2: That seems like a pretty big waste of space, and compute time. I think that the outer account signs the whole transaction, and isn't included on the `AtomicSigners` list.

It looks like you added something similar.

Author: Yes, I updated to reflect that 🙂

The inner transactions will be committed separately to the ledger and will therefore have separate metadata. This is to ensure better backwards compatibility for legacy systems, so they can support `Atomic` transactions without needing any changes to their systems.

For example, a ledger that only has one `Atomic` transaction containing 2 inner transactions would look like this:
```
[
  OuterTransaction,
  InnerTransaction1,
  InnerTransaction2
]
```

#### 2.6.1. Outer Transactions

Each outer transaction will only contain the metadata for its sequence and fee processing, not for the inner transaction processing.

There will also be a list of which transactions were actually processed, which is useful for the `ONLYONE` and `BATCH` atomicity types, since those may only process a subset of transactions, and for debugging with all atomicity types. This section will be called `AtomicExecutions`.

It will contain a list of objects that have the following fields for every transaction that is processed (successfully or unsuccessfully):

|FieldName | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
|:---------|:-----------|:---------------|:------------|
|`TransactionHash`|✔️|`string`|`STUInt256`|

> |`TransactionResult`|✔️|`string`|`STUInt8`|

Reviewer 2: I just realized this might be an issue if inner transactions are allowed to fail with the "soft" failure types: `tel`, `ter`, `tem`, and `tef`. First, those result codes are represented by negative values, and thus can't (easily) be represented by a `uint`. Second, and more significantly, the values of those codes have always been flexible. They're allowed to change, so that it's not a big deal to insert a new result code in the middle of the existing list. This would change that, and require them to be locked in the way `tec` codes are now:
```
    // Note: Exact numbers must stay stable.  These codes are stored by
    // value in metadata for historic transactions.
```

This would be an issue for every batch type except `ALL`.

Author: Would you rather it be stored as a `VL` string name then?

Reviewer 2: I don't know... The UInt8 saves a lot of space.... What do you think about two fields: one UInt8 for `tec` and `tes`, and one string for everything else?

Author: That's a bit complicated to work with and feels a bit confusing...
What about a UInt16 that's the TER code value + 400? Or something like that, where there's a transformation?

Reviewer 2: > That's a bit complicated to work with and feels a bit confusing... 

Yeah, I can see that.

> What about a UInt16 that's the TER code value + 400? Or something like that, where there's a transformation?

The real problem is not that the values are negative, but that they're intentionally unstable. Otherwise the transformation is a great idea.

Author: > The real problem is not that the values are negative, but that they're intentionally unstable. Otherwise the transformation is a great idea.

Why intentionally? Theoretically that's just a norm and could be changed, right?

Reviewer 2: I just looked at `TER.h` and noticed that there's a notation that the values are used in the `ripple-binary-codec`, so I guess that ship has already sailed. Still, please note it in the spec, maybe the FAQ.

https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/blob/develop/src/ripple/protocol/TER.h#L44-L46

Some important things to note:
* It is possible that all transactions will not be included in this list. For example, when using the `ONLYONE` atomicity type, if the first transaction succeeds, then the rest of the transactions will not even be processed. 

> * Transactions will only be included in the ledger if their result code is `tesSUCCESS` _and_ if the outer transaction has a result code of `tesSUCCESS`. For example, the inner transaction might have a result code of `tesSUCCESS` without being included in the ledger if the `ALL` atomicity type is used, but one of the transaction fails.

Reviewer 2: If the transaction is able to claim a fee, it should claim that fee, even if that is counted as a failure for the purposes of the batch processing. Thus:
```suggestion
* Transactions will only be included in the ledger if their result code is `tesSUCCESS` or starts with `tec` _and_ if the outer transaction has a result code of `tesSUCCESS`. For example, the inner transaction might have a result code of `tesSUCCESS` without being included in the ledger if the `ALL` atomicity type is used, but one of the transaction fails.
```

Author: There is no fee on the inner transactions, so it doesn't make a difference.

#### 2.6.2. Inner Transactions

Each inner transaction will contain the metadata for its own processing. Only the inner transactions that were actually committed to the ledger will be included. This makes it easier for legacy systems to still be able to process `Atomic` transactions as if they were normal.

> There will also be a pointer back to the parent outer transaction (`parent_atomic`), for ease of development (similar to the `nftoken_id` field).

Reviewer 2: What is the type of `parent_atomic`? The transaction ID? If yes, good. Otherwise, the `AtomicTxn` will be sufficient to find the parent tx.

Author: Yes, the transaction ID. IMO it'd still be nice to have the transaction ID for ease of development - should be easy enough for the RPCs to find it from `AtomicTxn`, so it would probably add less load to the RPCs than `nftoken_id`.

## 3. Transaction Common Fields

As a reference, [here](https://xrpl.org/docs/references/protocol/transactions/common-fields/) are the fields that all transactions currently have.

<!--There are too many and I didn't want to list them all, it cluttered up the spec - but maybe it can be a collapsed section?-->

We propose these modifications:

| Field Name | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
|------------|-----------|-----------|---------------|
|`AtomicTxn`| |`object`|`STObject`|

### 3.1. `AtomicTxn`

> The `AtomicTxn` inner object **must** be included in any inner transaction of an `Atomic` transaction. Its inclusion prevents hash collisions between identical transactions (since sequence numbers aren't included) and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `AtomicTxn` inner object **must** be included in any inner transaction of an `Atomic` transaction. Its inclusion prevents hash collisions between identical transactions (since sequence numbers aren't included).
```

The fields contained in this object are:

| Field Name | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
|------------|-----------|-----------|---------------|
|`Account`|✔️|`string`|`AccountID`|
|`OuterSequence`| ✔️|`number`|`UInt32`|
|`Sequence`| |`number`|`UInt32`|

> |`AtomicIndex`| |`number`|`UInt8`|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|`AtomicIndex`| ✔️ |`number`|`UInt8`|
```

## 4. Edge Cases of Transaction Processing

### 4.1. Ledger Object ID Generation

Some objects, such as [offers](https://xrpl.org/docs/references/protocol/ledger-data/ledger-entry-types/offer/#offer-id-format) and [escrows](https://xrpl.org/docs/references/protocol/ledger-data/ledger-entry-types/escrow/#escrow-id-format), use the sequence number of the creation transaction as a part of their ledger entry ID generation, to ensure uniqueness of the IDs.

To get around this, in single-account `Atomic` transactions, a "phantom sequence number" will be used instead. The "phantom sequence number" will be equal to `AtomicTxn.OuterSequence + AtomicTxn.AtomicIndex`.

Multi-account transactions use the same "phantom sequence number" strategy, but instead uses the equation `AtomicTxn.Sequence + AtomicTxn.AtomicIndex`, since the `OuterSequence` does not map to the inner transaction's account.

### 4.2. Sequence Number Handling

Section 4.1 describes how sequence numbers are used in inner transactions.

> The sequence numbers will always be consumed (i.e. the `AccountRoot`'s `Sequence` will be incremented) for each processed inner transaction. A transaction counts as being "processed" if it is applied to the ledger, i.e. if a `tec` or `tes` error is received. The sequence number will be incremented by the total number of inner transactions that that account had included in the `Atomic` transaction, to avoid any hash collisions.

Reviewer 2: Because `AtomicIndex` is independent of which account is used on the inner transaction, I don't think it's sufficient to increment by the number of transactions for that account.

For example, A submits an `ONLYONE` type that has a mix of accounts used
```
Sequence: 10,
RawTransactions: [ 
  # For simplicity, I'm only including Account, AtomicIndex, and optional TransactionType
  A, 0,
  B, 1,
  A, 2,
  C, 3,
  A, 4,
  A, 5, OfferCreate
]
```
If #5 succeeds, then the sequence used for that offer will be `10 + 5 = 15`. If the sequence is "incremented by the total number of inner transactions that that account had included in the `Atomic` transaction", then it will only be `10 + 4 = 14`. That leaves sequence 15 available to be reused for a later `OfferCreate`, leading to a hash collision. It should end up as 16.

```suggestion
The sequence numbers will always be consumed (i.e. the `AccountRoot`'s `Sequence` will be incremented) if any inner transactions are processed. A transaction counts as being "processed" if it is applied to the ledger, i.e. if a `tec` or `tes` error is received. The sequence number for each account will be incremented by the total number of inner transactions included in the `Atomic` transaction, to avoid any hash collisions.
```
That could be specified as "The sequence number for each account that had any transactions processed", but I figure
1. Sequence numbers are cheap.
2. This allows all accounts to know definitively what their next sequence number will be if the `Atomic` succeeds, regardless of what happens inside.

Author: Yes, that is what I meant to say. Thanks for the note - will make it more precise.

Author: A thought, if we care a little bit about preserving sequence numbers - 
We could save a few sequence numbers if `UNTILFAILURE` only claims `n` sequence numbers in their processing, where `n` is the number of transactions that were processed successfully before the failure - since there is no way for a higher sequence number to have been used.
Also if we only use the max index that account had in the `Atomic`, rather than always using the total.

Reviewer 2: I'm ok with that from a ledger integrity standpoint, though I do worry about the added complexity.

Author: That's a good point. I'll leave a note about it in the FAQ so we don't forget, but I think we can implement that later if needed, if somehow sequence numbers become more scarce.

## 6. Examples

### 6.1. One Account

In this example, the user is creating an offer while trading on a DEX UI, and the second transaction is a platform fee.

#### 6.1.1. Sample Transaction

<details open>
<summary>

The inner transactions are not signed, and the `AtomicSigners` field is not needed on the outer transaction, since there is only one account involved.
</summary>

```typescript
{
  TransactionType: "Atomic",
  Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
  Flags: "1",
  TxnIDs: [
    "7EB435C800D7DC10EAB2ADFDE02EE5667C0A63AA467F26F90FD4CBCD6903E15E",
    "EAE6B33078075A7BA958434691B896CCA4F532D618438DE6DDC7E3FB7A4A0AAB"
  ],
  RawTransactions: [
    {
      RawTransaction: {
        TransactionType: "OfferCreate",
        Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
        TakerGets: "6000000",
        TakerPays: {
          currency: "GKO",
          issuer: "ruazs5h1qEsqpke88pcqnaseXdm6od2xc",
          value: "2"
        },
        AtomicTxn: {
          Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
          OuterSequence: 3,

>           BatchIndex: 0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          AtomicIndex: 0
```
(And everywhere else.)

        },
        Sequence: 0,

>         Fee: "0",

Reviewer 2: This contradicts [above](#21-fee), which says
> each inner transaction handles its own fees.

(I won't point this out for the rest of the examples.)

Author: The linked line wasn't updated previously, so all the places were you marked this were actually the correct answer 😅

>   RawTransactions: [
>     {
>       RawTransaction: {
>         TransactionType: "OfferCreate",
>         Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
>         TakerGets: "6000000",
>         TakerPays: {
>           currency: "GKO",
>           issuer: "ruazs5h1qEsqpke88pcqnaseXdm6od2xc",
>           value: "2"
>         },
>         AtomicTxn: {
>           Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
>           OuterSequence: 3,
>           BatchIndex: 0
>         },
>         Sequence: 0,
>         Fee: "0",
>         SigningPubKey: "",
>         TxnSignature: ""
>       }
>     },
>     {
>       RawTransaction: {
>         TransactionType: "Payment",
>         Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
>         Destination: "rDEXfrontEnd23E44wKL3S6dj9FaXv",
>         Amount: "1000",
>         AtomicTxn: {
>           Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
>           OuterSequence: 3,
>           BatchIndex: 1
>         },
>         Sequence: 0,
>         Fee: "0",
>         SigningPubKey: "",
>         TxnSignature: ""
>       }
>     }
>   ],

Reviewer 2: Is it necessary to have the multiple levels of nesting like this? Could the list of transactions more simply be specified as:
```suggestion
  RawTransactions: [
    {
      TransactionType: "OfferCreate",
      Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
      TakerGets: "6000000",
      TakerPays: {
        currency: "GKO",
        issuer: "ruazs5h1qEsqpke88pcqnaseXdm6od2xc",
        value: "2"
      },
      AtomicTxn: {
        Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
        OuterSequence: 3,
        BatchIndex: 0
      },
      Sequence: 0,
      Fee: "0",
      SigningPubKey: "",
      TxnSignature: ""
    },
    {
      TransactionType: "Payment",
      Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
      Destination: "rDEXfrontEnd23E44wKL3S6dj9FaXv",
      Amount: "1000",
      AtomicTxn: {
        Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
        OuterSequence: 3,
        BatchIndex: 1
      },
      Sequence: 0,
      Fee: "0",
      SigningPubKey: "",
      TxnSignature: ""
    }
  ],
```

Author: I thought that was an unfortunate necessity of the serialization mechanism - that STArrays could only contain STObjects.

Reviewer 2: You may be right about that. I don't remember offhand.

Author: I'd love to make that change if it's possible 😅  Let me know if you come across any information about it.

    Amount: "1000",
    AtomicTxn: {
      Account: "rUserBSM7T3b6nHX3Jjua62wgX9unH8s9b",
      OuterSequence: 3,
      BatchIndex: 1
    },
    Sequence: 0,
    Fee: "0",
    SigningPubKey: "",
    TxnSignature: ""
  }
]
```
</details>

### 6.2. Multiple Accounts

In this example, two users are atomically swapping their tokens, XRP for GKO.

#### 6.2.1. Sample Transaction

<details open>
<summary>

The inner transactions are still not signed, but the `AtomicSigners` field is needed on the outer transaction, since there are two accounts' inner transactions in this `Atomic` transaction.
</summary>

```typescript
{
  TransactionType: "Atomic",
  Account: "rUser1fcu9RJa5W1ncAuEgLJF2oJC6",
  Flags: "1",
  TxnIDs: [
    "A2986564A970E2B206DC8CA22F54BB8D73585527864A4484A5B0C577B6F13C95",
    "0C4316F7E7D909E11BB7DBE0EB897788835519E9950AE8E32F5182468361FE7E"
  ],
  RawTransactions: [
    {
      RawTransaction: {
        TransactionType: "Payment",
        Account: "rUser1fcu9RJa5W1ncAuEgLJF2oJC6",
        Destination: "rUser2fDds782Bd6eK15RDnGMtxf7m",
        Amount: "6000000",
        AtomicTxn: {
          Account: "rUser1fcu9RJa5W1ncAuEgLJF2oJC6",
          OuterSequence: 4,

>           Sequence: 10,

Reviewer 2: This inner transaction is from the outer account, so it does not need a `Sequence`, or if it does, it should be 4, correct?

Author: I was picking random numbers and forgot to ensure they were the same 😅 
For `getSeqProxy` within the inner transaction, the `Sequence` value still needs to be here.

          BatchIndex: 0
        },
        Sequence: 0,
        Fee: "0",
        SigningPubKey: "",
        TxnSignature: ""
      }
    },
    {
      RawTransaction: {
        TransactionType: "Payment",
        Account: "rUser2fDds782Bd6eK15RDnGMtxf7m",
        Destination: "rUser1fcu9RJa5W1ncAuEgLJF2oJC6",
        Amount: {
          currency: "GKO",
          issuer: "ruazs5h1qEsqpke88pcqnaseXdm6od2xc",
          value: "2"
        },
        AtomicTxn: {
          Account: "rUser1fcu9RJa5W1ncAuEgLJF2oJC6",
          OuterSequence: 4,
          Sequence: 20,
          BatchIndex: 1
        },
        Sequence: 0,
        Fee: "0",
        SigningPubKey: "",
        TxnSignature: ""
      }
    }
  ],
  AtomicSigners: [
    {
      AtomicSigner: {
        Account: "rUser1fcu9RJa5W1ncAuEgLJF2oJC6",
        SigningPubKey: "03072BBE5F93D4906FC31A690A2C269F2B9A56D60DA9C2C6C0D88FB51B644C6F94",
        Signature: "304502210083DF12FA60E2E743643889195DC42C10F62F0DE0A362330C32BBEC4D3881EECD022010579A01E052C4E587E70E5601D2F3846984DB9B16B9EBA05BAD7B51F912B899"

>       }

Reviewer 2: As I asked about above, having an `AtomicSigner` for the outer transaction's account, when it's also signing the entire transaction seems like a waste of ledger space.

Author: I'm okay with making that change.

  }
]
```
</details>

# Appendix

## Appendix A: FAQ

### A.1: What if I want a more complex tree of transactions that are AND/XORed together? Can I nest `Atomic` transactions?

The original version of this spec supported nesting `Atomic` transactions. However, upon further analysis, that was deemed a bit too complicated for an initial version of `Atomic`, as most of the benefit from this new feature does not require nested transactions. Based on user and community need, this could be added as part of a V2.

### A.2: What if all of the transactions fail? Will a fee still be claimed?

Yes, just as they would if they were individually submitted. 

### A.3: Could there be an additional atomicity type for allowing all transactions to be processed regardless of whether they succeeded?

This is unnecessary, since that is equivalent to submitting the transactions normally.

### A.4: Would this feature enable greater frontrunning abilities?

That is definitely a concern. Ways to mitigate this are still being investigated. Some potential answers:
* Charge for more extensive path usage
* Have higher fees for atomic transactions
* Submit the atomic transactions at the end of the ledger

> ### A.5: What error is returned if all the transactions fail in an `OR`/`BATCH` transaction?

Reviewer 2: `OR` has been renamed. Is that `ONLYONE` now?

Author: Yes, good catch.

A general error, `temBATCH_FAILED`/`tecBATCH_FAILED`, will be returned. A list of all the return codes encountered for the transactions that were processed will be included in the metadata, for easier debugging.

### A.6: Can another account sign/pay for the outer transaction if they don't have any of the inner transactions?

> If there are multiple parties in the inner transactions, yes. Otherwise, no. This is because in a single party `Atomic` transaction, the inner transaction's signoff is provided by `AtomicSigners`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there are multiple parties in the inner transactions, yes. Otherwise, no. This is because in a single party `Atomic` transaction, the inner transaction's signoff is provided by the normal transaction signing fields.
```

### A.7: How is the `BATCH` atomicity type any different than existing behavior with sequence numbers?

Right now, if you submit a series of transactions with consecutive sequence numbers without the use of tickets or `Atomic`, then if one fails in the middle, all subsequent transactions will also fail due to incorrect sequence numbers (since the one that failed would have the next sequence numbers).

The difference between the `BATCH` atomicity type and this existing behavior is that right now, the subsequent transactions will only fail with a non-`tec` error code. If the failed transaction receives an error code starting with `tec`, then a fee is claimed and a sequence number is consumed, and the subsequent transactions will still be processed as usual.

### A.8: Is it possible for inner transactions to end up in a different ledger than the outer transaction?

> No, because the inner transactions skip the transaction queue. They are already effectively processed by the queue via the outer transaction.

Reviewer 2: This should also address how the inner transactions will be handled by consensus. I suggest that inner transactions be excluded from the proposal sets. Only the outer transaction is included, so - again - it's all or nothing.

Author: Oh, good point.

### A.9: How does this work in conjunction with [XLS-49d](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions/144)? If I give a signer list powers over the `Atomic` transaction, can it effectively run all transaction types?

The answer to this question is still being investigated. Some potential answers:
* All signer lists should have access to this transaction but only for the transaction types they have powers over
* Only the global signer list can have access to this transaction

### A.10: Why not call this transaction `Batch`?

It has greater capabilities than just batching transactions. 

### A.11: What if I want some error code types to be allowed to proceed, just as `tesSUCCESS` would, in e.g. an `ALL` case?

This was deemed unnecessary. If you have a need for this, please provide example use-cases.

### A.12: What if I want the `Atomic` inner transaction accounts to handle their own fees?

> That is not supported in this version of the spec, as it is cleaner to just have one account pay the fee.

Reviewer 2: This contradicts [above](#21-fee), which says
> each inner transaction handles its own fees.
